#separator:tab
#html:false
#notetype:Basic
#deck:Network Systems Foundations
#tags:NSF-Network-Security-IPsec
What does IPsec create, and what is it commonly used for?	An encrypted tunnel between two endpoints, either machine to machine or covering a whole site. Commonly used for VPNs.
What are the ways an attacker could eavesdrop on traffic between two sites?	Wi-fi is a broadcast medium so anyone nearby can see it; a network provider could be compelled by a government, have a rogue employee, or run a compromised router; routing misconfiguration can redirect traffic unintentionally; route hijacking can redirect it intentionally.
List the phases of setting up an IPsec tunnel, in order.	SA-1 parameter exchange, Diffie Hellman key exchange, authentication, SA-2 parameter exchange, then encrypted traffic exchange. The setup protocol is ISAKMP/IKE.
What happens in the SA-1 parameter exchange?	The initiator lists what it supports across four categories (encryption, hashing, Diffie Hellman group, authentication method), and the responder picks one from each list and sends its choices back.
Why does the choice of Diffie Hellman group matter?	It affects both the level of security and the amount of CPU required to implement it.
What problem does Diffie Hellman solve for IPsec?	IPsec uses shared symmetric keys for both encryption and integrity, so the two sides need a shared secret. Diffie Hellman lets two parties with no prior knowledge of each other establish one over an insecure channel.
Walk through the Diffie Hellman exchange.	The initiator picks prime p and base g and sends them in the clear. It picks secret x and sends hA = g^x mod p. The responder picks secret y and sends hB = g^y mod p. Each raises the received value to their own secret: K = (hB)^x mod p = (hA)^y mod p.
Why do both Diffie Hellman parties arrive at the same key, and why can an eavesdropper not compute it?	Expanding either side gives g^xy mod p, so the values match even though neither party knows the other's secret. An attacker sees only p, g, hA and hB, and computing K from those is hard without one of the secrets.
What are the two authentication options in IPsec, and how is the authentication step protected?	A pre-shared private key, or a digital certificate binding an identity to a public key and signed by a CA. The choice is made in SA-1, and the step itself is encrypted using the session keys from the Diffie Hellman exchange.
What does the SA-2 parameter exchange do, and what does SA stand for?	SA stands for Security Association. SA-2 agrees the parameters for the actual traffic, separate from authentication in case different ones are wanted, and sets up traffic selectors that determine what traffic is allowed through the tunnel (a 5-tuple of IP source and destination, protocol, and transport source and destination ports).
What is the difference between AH and ESP?	AH (Authenticating Header) provides integrity only. ESP (Encapsulating Security Payload) provides integrity and confidentiality.
What is the difference between IPsec transport mode and tunnel mode?	Transport mode is for single endpoints and leaves the original IP header exposed, encrypting and integrity-checking only the packet data. Tunnel mode is for whole sites: the original IP header is encrypted along with the rest, and a new IP header for the site edge points is added on the outside.
